Questions.
Thank you.
Morena koutou, tena koe Madam Chair, members of the
committee, tena koutou.
My name's Stu Kneebone. I'm one of the co-chairs of the Waikato River
Authority. With me is our Kaihautū, CEO,
Anton Coffin.
So look, thank you very much for this opportunity.
We really appreciate you adding these extra schedules of
submitters in. So I'll now hand over to our Kaihautū, Anton, to
take
you through our submission. Thank you.
Good morning, members of the committee.
There's a little bit of trepidation being first up in the morning.
You don't get a feel for what people have said right before you and what's been
happening and get into it. So, a little bit nervous being very first up, but
we'll do our best. Thank you for the opportunity to
present this morning. And with your leave, I'll just get straight into our
presentation.
So
today we're going to
give a summary of our submissions from the Waikato River
Authority. And just as a little bit of background, our authority came
into existence in 2010 as a result of the
Waikato River treaty settlements.
We're a statutory body that was established with
three purposes, one of those being to set the vision
and strategy, Te Tiriti Whai Mana, for the Waikato River,
promote integrated, coordinated, and holistic approach to the management of the
river, and also to fund rehabilitation activities.
So we're part of three settlement acts for the river that cover
the whole river from the Huka Falls all the way up to the mouth
of the Waikato River. There are also five river iwi
post-governance entities that were established as part of the
settlements, and all of them have submitted to the bills
as part of this process.
As I said before, we're an independent statutory body, and we actually got a really
interesting co-governance model where we have five Crown representatives
and five river iwi representatives.
Today, we're advocating for Te Tiriti Whai Mana, the vision and strategy for the
Waikato River. The vision and strategy, Te
Tiriti Whai Mana, was intended by Parliament to be a primary direction-setting
document for the river.
It's a central element of the unique legislation in New Zealand
enacted in relation to the river and its catchment and all it embraces, including
the large catchment of the Waipā River as well.
Our primary interest in the bill is to ensure there's no diminishment of the status
and effect of Te Tiriti Whai Mana or the role of the River Authority in the
management of the Waikato and Waipā River catchments.
Just as a slight aside, we're not technically a post-settlement governance entity.
We were set up as a unique body to be independent, but also
to have roles in collaboration and partnership with the Crown and also
with river iwi.
In terms of some context, as you know, the Waikato catchment is a big
catchment.
It's over a million hectares.
There are longstanding relationships of the iwi and hapū with the lands and
waters. But also, today, farming is a really important part
of the regional economy. Hamilton and Taupō are urban and
industrial growth areas and transport hubs.
And there are many fast-track listed projects and referrals in this area.
So it just sort of talks to people wanting to be in this
area. There's legacy electricity generation,
and long-term municipal takes, both for Waikato and
Auckland. So the river is very, very important to lots of
parts of our area.
Over the last 15 years since our inception, we've made a concerted effort in
restoration, planning, and implementation for the
long-term restoration and health and wellbeing of the Waikato River.
As I've mentioned before, you would have heard from river iwi talking to their
special relationships and connections they have.
As drafted, we feel that the
bills do not uphold the existing treaty settlement arrangements, particularly in
relation to the Waikato and Waipā Rivers.
For the most part, the bills are silent.
In the present system, there are lots of ways that the vision and strategy, Te
Tiriti Whai Mana, connects.
These include when preparing and reviewing regional policy statement, it must be
included.
And it avoids the Schedule 1 process, so it gets
in as a matter of right.
National policy statements and environmental standards, there are direct
links to those.
The Te Tiriti Whai Mana directs consistency of plans prepared by
councils, and a range of different instruments and tools that make
sure that Te Tiriti Whai Mana is at the forefront of all the decisions
that have been made in the planning system.
As well as some of the more recent
advancements in terms of links to wastewater environmental performance
standards, and also land use intensification.
One of the really important roles that we also play is in appointing commissioners.
So we work quite closely with river iwi to make sure that there's a voice
for those people who have a really close connection in some of the
large-scale applications, and that's a process that's been working successfully
for some time.
Turning our thoughts to what changes can be made,
we recommend some changes now rather than later.
And we really think that the committee has an opportunity to set up the bills for
equivalency.
And these are in the areas of the interpretation.
Could be adding the settlement acts in Section 9, having
references to the Waikato River Authority.
We were suggesting a new Section 10A, where you have particular regard
and recognition of Te Tiriti Whai Mana up front.
And in the goals, there could be some recognition of treaty settlements.
We've turned our minds to some of the drafting when we were preparing our
submissions, butThey felt they were very
much narrow in terms of what our role is,
understanding that the treaty settlements are a package,
and they need to be approached in a concerted and comprehensive
way. And so even though we'd put our mind to lots of the drafting,
they needed to also consider what kind of impacts they might
have on other parts of the settlement that are also important.
So what are we requesting? We're asking that the committee change the clauses to
refer to equivalency, and these are in clauses nine and 10 in each
of the bill.
We're thinking that relying entirely on the
post-enactment process to retrofit the treaty settlement arrangement is
an unnecessary risk.
And we recommend the process for secondary legislation waits for the discussions to
be had with our PSGE partners in the catchment.
I certainly, and some of the committee members might remember when the RMA came in,
and it was quite exciting around the hierarchy that was going to be put in, and
we'd have national policy statements, we'd have regional policy
statements, we'd have regional plans, we'd have district plans, and the hierarchy
from the legislation would cascade. But it took two generations to achieve it.
As many will know, the transitional plans took 10, 15
years. Regional policy statements come after, then regional
plans, and then the national policy statements.
So we did it the wrong way around, and it seems like they're learning from that.
This time we could do it the right way around, getting the legislation right,
getting the secondary legislation right, and then it cascades down.
Just to conclude,
we certainly have, you would have seen from the tenor of our submission
that we're really concerned about retrofitting the current treaty settlement
arrangements after the bills are enacted and the secondary legislation and plans
are already in play. And we're asking that the committee recommend that existing
settlements are discussed now in the new system of secondary
legislation.
Certainly, we want to be included in the discussions and the formulation of the
bills as they move through the legislative process, particularly in
regards to the purpose and functions of the River Settlement Acts and the
roles of the Waipato River Authority.
We're thinking there's an opportunity to get things right,
right now, that will set us well up for the next few generations.
And just going to stop there and see if there's any questions you may have.
Look, thank you very much. We have got one question from Lan.
Tena koutou. Thank you so much for your submission.
I wanted to pick up on,
firstly, just your comments around going first this morning.
We were actually in public hearings for a different bill even earlier this morning,
but I wanted to pick up on a number of comments that we've
heard from multiple
iwi and hapū, both settled and non-settled.
And virtually, they talked in different
language about
their concerns about treaty relationships and what
the
passing of these bills might do to that, and one of them used the word
eviscerate treaty relationships.
You're sounding
very pragmatic and constructive in being willing
to work in a way where you think-- It sounds
like you're
keen to get things right now.
Do you think simply more time
in this process would allow you to work with the Crown,
to work with officials, to actually ensure that you're getting it
right, right now? Because as you're likely aware, there's
very
constrained time frames around the government wanting to push this through.
Can you comment on that?
Well, first to acknowledge the sentiment that's
been given to the select committee.
We've come here with a mindset of trying to be really constructive,
and finding a way that we can put our best foot forward to make sure the
treaty settlement's integrity is reflected in the
bills.
And I suppose that
doesn't dismiss the sentiment that we're hearing.
People are being very disappointed
about where are the principles of goodwill and integrity and
good faith. Where are the principles that are
enshrined in the legislation that was passed by Parliament
in terms of the relationship and the partnership with the Crown?
So notwithstanding those things, we're trying to see if there is
a possibility with the time that we do have to get things right.
So yes, time is an important factor to get things right.
You would have seen the benefit of having time in lots of legislation that's passed
quickly. You either spend the time when you're preparing it, or you spend the time
trying to fix it afterwards. And so it seems like we're in that part of the
process. We can make choices. Do we use the time constructively to
get things right, or do we not use the time and then we go onto the other side
and you're in a deficit position where you're trying to
fix things or not be able to fix things, and then the fallout that comes from
those.
Mm-hmm. Look, thank you very much for your time
today. We have met time. We appreciate your submission.
So thank you.
Hey, thanks for the opportunity.
Thank you very much.
Kia ora.
So we now move to our next submitter who is here, Choose Clean
Water. Tom, welcome to the select committee
this morning. You've got 10 minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you.
Cool. Thank you very much. I'm going to focus the things that I speak
to just on a couple of issues. You've heard from a lot of submitters already.
Choose Clean Water has a wide concern and mandate to comment on
water generally, but I'm going to focus specifically on drinking water
protections.
Then I'm going to comment briefly on some of the methods that you're looking at to
protect things like that.And then I've provided you with a PDF document, which may
or may not have made it to you already.
But I can just note some extra things we've put in there that you can look at in
your own time that I don't need to walk you through.
So I'll try and keep things pretty brief.
The first thing I want to talk about or take your minds back to is the Havelock
North drinking water Campylobacter outbreak, which you will know very
well being from Hawke's Bay.
2016, 5,500 cases of Campylobacter illness,
45 hospitalisations, three deaths connected to that outbreak,
$21 million cost to that community,
and ultimately an issue with the drinking water system, with the protection of the
source all the way through to water coming out of people's taps.
Now, this is a massive issue or a growing issue across
the country.
In some ways, unfortunately, what was the biggest case recorded in the world is
potentially at risk of being a small case in the scheme of things.
We've had Selwyn spending $5 million on investigations
to secure their drinking water supply with a potential $400 million
long-term cost. Gore has just built a new pipe under one of their rivers to
dilute their water because it was contaminated with nitrates above drinking water
standards. Sorry, Waimate was. Gore and
Waimate are both building pipes to dilute their water supplies.
And then there's some estimates around places like Christchurch, if their water was
contaminated beyond drinking water standards, that it would cost in the order
of hundreds of millions into the billions of dollars
to deal with their water.
After the Havelock North drinking water Campylobacter outbreak,
there was a report written, an inquiry in 2017, and I've put some
pages from that in a document in front of you.
And I want to draw your attention to a couple of conclusions in that.
Paragraph 617 in particular, the inquiry considers it essential that the
protection of drinking water sources be expressly recognised in the primary
resource management legislation.
So for a government that has
reassured us that it's going to be evidence-based, you have an opportunity here to
take a recommendation from the past and act on that in your resource
management legislation that you're drafting at the moment.
The inquiry goes on to recommend things like amending Section 6, so essentially
making drinking water protection a matter of national importance, to provide
regional councils with explicit direction to protect drinking water sources,
and basically to say, if you don't do this stuff, you need some other form of
national direction that does that. Now, you might say, "Hey, we did that.
We've got a national environmental standard for drinking water.
We've got an NPS for freshwater." The NPS for freshwater does prioritise
human drinking water under Te Mana o te Wai, but the government is
planning or proposing to scrap that hierarchy.
And the bills you have in front of you, the Natural Environment and Planning Bills,
only say that basically, we need to have regard to
drinking water supplies. They do not direct the protection of drinking water
supplies or drinking water sources being rivers, lakes,
aquifers as a matter of national importance.
So I think that's a huge gap in the bill where we risk
significantly degrading our drinking water supplies or essentially having this
continue to be missed 10 years after you were given these recommendations,
and ultimately cost our communities in terms of illness, but
also financially.
Moving on from that to, and you can obviously get advice on that as
you wish, and I recommend you do, but yeah, some strong recommendations there that
I think you should pay attention to.
Moving on from that to some of the tools that you're looking at
using to protect things like that, regardless of whether you decide that you should
only have regard to drinking water sources or whether you should actually protect
them as a matter of national importance.
There have been a lot of comments from submitters on the tools that you're going to
use. Some that have struck me have been around farm plans and
non-regulatory mechanisms. Environment Canterbury, for example, sat
in front of you and said, "Hey, look, farm plans are working quite well in our
region." In their view, a lot of people have A grades.
I want to draw your attention to page five of the documents I've given you,
which is the Ōtūwharekai Ashburton Lakes report written by Ministry for the
Environment. I suggest you get some advice on this too.
But some comments I've highlighted there basically
point out to you that farm plans generally in these places have not been
connected to outcomes. So it's all good for Environment Canterbury to get here and
sit in front of you and say that a lot of their farm plans have A grades.
It doesn't matter if they have an A grade if nothing in that farm plan
is connected to the water quality outcome for the place that we're trying to
protect. So the report specifically says, the farm environment
plan system is overly focused on process rather than environmental outcomes.
So long as farm environment plan A or B grades were achieved,
intensification of high-risk areas near the Ashburton and Ōtūwharekai Lakes were
not monitored or controlled. So these lakes continued to degrade despite the fact
that you had a supposedly robust,
non-regulatory system in place. And if you go to the final page of that
report that I've put in there or page seven in my document, it says the new
National Freshwater Farm Plan system has similarities to the ECAN system, and
that hasn't changed. This report's from a few years ago, but the system that you
are looking at is ultimately going to be similar.
There's other comments in there around lack of information and transparency.
Environment Canterbury has these plans across the region.
They don't have copies of them. They don't know how many cows are operating across
all these catchments. They don't know how much fertilizer is being used across all
these catchments. They have no information readily available to them on the
pressures in these catchments, and that's another issue that the
report pointed out. So I just want you to be aware that you're being told that this
non-regulatory stuff is going to work. The evidence suggests otherwise.
And I'd also point out that farm plans have been something that's been used in New
Zealand since the 1950s for soil conservation and
erosion. We've been told for decades that they will solve our problems, and they
have not. So just be really aware of that.
Finally, I want to draw your attention to a couple of other things that I'll let
you look at in your own time, but I've included two other attachments, C and D.
One, I've heard developers sit in front of you and say, "Look, we don't need much
regulation. It's all red tape. Why would we build under a cliff face?
Why would we build in a floodplain?
We're not that stupid."A couple of cases here where that's happened.
Tangoyo and Hawke's Bay, a developer actually pushed
council for a private plan change to allow them to develop in a floodplain.
It's since been zoned as basically a red zone.
Have a look at that story or get some advice on it.
Another example from Matarangi, where a developer cleared a wetland despite the
NPS saying that that's something that you can't do.
So due diligence just not done despite their assurances.
Finally, we've heard a bit about things like cultural values supposedly getting in
the way of resource consents. It's been something that's come through quite
strongly from Federated Farmers, for example.
I've just included part of the Gore District Plan decision, which basically says
that in that region, in that plan, those concerns are unfounded.
This doesn't get in the way of day-to-day farming activities.
So have a look at that, get some advice on that.
And that's about seven minutes, so maybe if you've got a question or two, I've got
time for them.
Thank you, Tom, for that submission. We'll go to Rachel first.
Great management of your submission time, too.
Yes.
Thank you for that. And you've got a lot in the submission about limits
and the
workarounds and how they
have to be balanced about against other things and the like.
So acknowledging that content, but what I'm interested in asking
you to talk about is what we hear
is if you had a national limit for, say, nitrates, which is
what you refer to, then sometimes...
Well, not even nitrates, but for some things, people will say, well,
the limits are set at a
point that is beyond what a normal environment would
have, even if there was no-
Yeah
... human interference going.
Yeah.
So
is there a role for targets or some other mechanisms, or where do
you think limits should be set-
Yeah
... in terms of a pristine environment versus-
Yeah. So my view on this is this has been a-
...
This has been a red herring for over 10 years.
I started getting involved in the national policy statement development back in
sort of 2017-ish, maybe even earlier than that.
Early versions of the national policy statement have always said, if you have a
place that naturally exceeds a limit, that's
fine, it provides for that. It gives you an exception.
The existing 2020 NPS gives you that exception.
So all this rhetoric that we're hearing about streams from pristine environments
exceeding limits, it doesn't matter. It's fine.
The NPS provides for that. I think there's also some misconceptions
about how different New Zealand is as a country.
You're often told, "Hey, we've got to go catchment by catchment and come up with
limits that are really specific." We're not that special. We're not that different.
New Zealand has these diverse landscapes, but from a freshwater
ecology perspective,
from freshwater ecologists, they can pretty confidently say, "Look, this is a
general limit that we should have across our country." There will be exceptions.
There are exceptions provided for in the NPS.
But we shouldn't go back through this, we need it
to be case by case, and then as soon as we try and do that, we get told that that's
unfair, that's different for different regions.
We need it to be a blanket approach.
As soon as we do a blanket approach, we're told that's unfair.
And it's just you're being led down this path for decades, I think,
and it's not that complicated.
Just as supplementary to that, what about
quite leaky soil? So I've got on my office wall the
Greenpeace and Ngāi Tahu map of the South Island,
and the nitrates in Southland and Canterbury are very clearly
different from Otago.
Yeah. And there's a recent report on drinking water risk in Southland that's come
out about those short residence times.
I think there is
some benefit through things like spatial planning.
Southland Plan, for example, looked a lot at the risk profile because of those
soils. And I think that's where spatial planning potentially gives you a huge
advantage to say what types of activities are suitable on
these soils that can then achieve the limits that are
set nationally or whatever it is that you end up doing.
So totally scope for that. The thing that we run into the problem with is where,
and it's happened in Hawke's Bay, for example, we have some very leaky
soils where growing grapes is great, but it requires a huge amount of water.
It's sort of this unfortunate consequence of that landowner
having ended up with that land and growing grapes on that land and then saying,
"Well, I need more water than everyone else because I'm on this old gravel
riverbed." And it's sort of like, well, we actually need to spatially plan to say,
is that a suitable activity to be happening on that land because we're wasting a
lot of water on that space. So yeah.
Okay. Look, Tom, we are going to have to leave it there. We have met time.
Thank you very much.
We appreciate your time and your submission, so thank you.
Thank you.
Yeah.
So we will now move to our next submitter, Love and
Co.
And I believe Love and Co.- oh, there we go.
Ian and Hamish, welcome to the select
committee this morning.
We will hand it over to you to talk us through your submission, and then we'll open
up for questions.
Thank you, and good morning, members.
The submission by Love and Co., the director, John Love, was unable to join you
today, so he asked Hamish and I to speak to some of the key points.
We are consultants that have done a bit and seen a bit,
and when he asked us for some advice when he was preparing his
submission, we had a few things to say.
So if you're happy, we'll just take you through some of the issues as we see it
and look forward to any questions you have.
And to dive right into it,
and just working through the points that John had made,
I think everyone would agree that adding a concept of being solutions
focused to the bill is a great idea.
But the challenge that we see is if there's
not clarity on what it is councils are being asked to do
as consent authorities,
what solutions might be focused on is hugely ambiguous.
And specifically, if councils
are primarily focused in the
context of a planning consent there to accept an applicant
can make an application for what they want, have it assessed against whether
it meets the relevant plan or legal matters, then being solutions
focused means don't muck around, don't be obtuse, be constructive,
act in good faith, move things forward. And I think everyone would agree with that.
ButBut what Hamish and I sometimes see are council
officers thinking they're environmental gatekeepers,
and we could show you written examples of Section 92
requests where the solutions focus is to ask
applicants to not infringe rules that they're seeking consent for in the first
place as a way to solve that problem.
So we would encourage Parliament to think about, well,
if we want to solve problems, what is the context of the problem being
solved? And if it's about
officers thinking it's their role to take an application and shape it as to
what they think would be a good outcome, well, then being solutions focused
might not help speed things up or help progress things.
If I can take that a step further. John is a developer of
housing, multi-unit housing in Auckland, and
both Ian and I are consultants with 25 to 30 years' experience
each. So we've seen what happens when an act of
Parliament is, in a way, interpreted by council in
such a way that makes it very, very difficult to get things done.
We're working on a job for John right now that's been in council for over a year.
Our solution is that council should not have that ability to make it
take that long for what is 50 or 60 houses
on a site zoned for housing.
Thank you, Hamish. Moving on.
Appreciate that there's a proposal through Section 14 of the bill
to exclude certain effects from consideration.
And the point we'd make there is that if the intent is to exclude
something, it needs to be fully excluded.
And the example in John's submission was the
difference between landscape effects and a landscape character or landscape values
effect, which either needs to be all in or all out, not half in or
half out. And
the point we'd just make about that again is to say it would be
probably negative if positive effects also got excluded from consideration.
Usually trying to find a way to get that betterment is something
that a lot of applicants want to do.
And it may incentivize them to not be so interested in those things if
they can't claim any credit or value from that.
And I think we've got to look at this in context.
What John is talking about here isn't about destroying some
outstanding natural landscape or visual in, say, Central Otago.
We're talking about a highly modified environment of urban Auckland,
where a landscape and visual assessment
really seems unnecessary given the context of what you're building in.
So it's about making sure that we don't
overregulate or provide... We've got to provide a pathway
for getting things done that we want to be done in an area.
Yes. I'm currently dealing with an application for a
high-rise tower in Auckland CBD, subject to an unlimited building height,
and there's a request for a landscape assessment of it, which is difficult for
people to really follow.
One matter we'd also draw your attention to is in proposed Section
38 of the bill, very specific. The way it's written, every
permitted activity must be registered, and to be registered,
one must include a variety of information, including reports from suitable
experts confirming its permitted affected party approvals and so
on. And the likelihood is that a council would then want its own experts to review
an applicant's experts. And there's a real risk of
making permitted activities much harder than they currently are and almost
needing a resource consent to show that you don't need a resource consent.
So we'd absolutely commend to you just being
clear in what circumstances you want permitted activities to
be registered and why.
In principle, it seems to make a bit of sense that everyone can keep track of what
people are doing, but there's a big difference between an applicant just providing
notice to a council that it wishes to undertake a permitted
activity and someone having to seek permission to confirm
that what they want to do is in fact permitted in every single instance.
And an example I'll give you, rather boring one.
I might want to build a fence in a special character area.
The maximum height in a rear or a side fence might be 1.8 meters.
So do I have to go and
show that I'm getting permission to confirm the permitted activity before I build
the fence, or can I build the fence and provide the information later?
Or why would there be any need for me to go and get another piece of paper from
council to confirm the permitted activity of building a fence to the
standard height in that special character area?
It seems to us to be adding paperwork to the process,
not taking it away.
We have a lot of experience
through resource consents or planning approvals, as they may become,
and particularly with requests for further information,
requests for peer reviews, use of things like specialist urban design
panels or design review panels, et cetera.
And I think the point that John's making is not that these
things are inappropriate or wrong, but really need to be subject to
clearer frameworks and guidelines.
The Auckland Urban Design Panel, for instance, is now mandatory,
including four to six weeks wait in some cases, and there's just no
negotiation about that. Even where an applicant has obtained specialist reports
and the council has specialist reports, it still wants that, and
there's simply no way out of that framework.
So the suggestion was that those things, as good as they can be, should
remain fully voluntary, and for applicants to also wish to be
part of, rather than, for instance, spending money on their own consultants if they
wish. Related to that, we see a lot, again, the request for further
information. We really would support a requirement that any person
invited to give a comment or review an application
really should be suitably qualified and experienced.
This is a lot of time and money getting second opinions or third opinions or fourth
opinions, and really, it should be about who's the
most suitably qualified to give that assurance, rather
than do you happen to be part of team council or team
applicant?
Further on that is the independence of some of these boards.
They'll often get confidential council officer briefings beforehand,
and it sometimes feels as if you're being tried before
a jury where you've got no chance of winning.
So we would express that they need to be independent
and separate from council in a way so that we
can get good outcomes.
Just because a council officer doesn't like the proposal doesn't mean it's got
merit, and doesn't mean it shouldn't be approved.
And just on that point of independence,
we're aware that independent commissioners get widely used.
We're aware, especially in the last six months or so, there's been some very
well-documented public discussions around the nature and
competence of some of those commissioners and how they become commissioners and who
appoints them, et cetera.
We would say there's huge support for independent commissioners and
the assistance they can provide everyone, whether they're a submitter or a
council or an applicant, or just a member of the community wanting confidence in
the system. But
we would say that where there is a real opacity in the current
system is the appointment process of how specific commissioners
find themselves appointed in specific instances or not.
And we would absolutely encourage a strengthening of independent
commissioner use across the country, including
possibly improving the training they receive, possibly
helping councils make appointments in a consistent and fully
independent way.
And
in the case of things that aren't public hearings, like making
notification decisions, it's really uncertain and unpredictable when
a council will let an applicant have an independent commissioner make that
decision, and when a council says, "No.
We don't have to, so the answer's no."
And it's something we again think could be made much more transparent for
everyone's benefit.
So on that-
Thank you, Ian. I'm just going to jump in there because you have almost met time.
All right.
And there is a question here, but if you want to potentially wrap it up,
if you can, that would be great.
Oh, look, the last thing we'll say then is just the planning tribunal idea.
Really support it. I think there's always been a gap between going
to a High Court or Environment Court, which is a huge process,
and the limitations of the current Section 357 objection process.
So something in the middle that can rove around the country providing consistent
help seems hugely valuable. We would encourage it to be
broadened than it currently is to cover all sorts of issues.
But as you requested, we'll wrap it up.
Thank you so much for your time, and good luck to you going forward.
Thank you.
Yeah, look, we are going to have to wrap it up there because we have met time.
But thank you very much, Ian and Hamish, for your
submission today from Love and Co.
Thank you.
Thank you. So moving on now to our next submission
is the Selwyn District Council.
Who hopefully are joining us online, coming through.
Okay.
Good.
Welcome to the select committee this morning. We can see you both there.
You have 10 minutes with us, so take your submission as read, and then we'll
open up for questions once you talk us through it. So over to you.
Thanks for the opportunity to speak today on the Selwyn District
Council's written submission. My name is Councillor Tracey McLeod, and
with me today is Councillor Sophie McGinness.
We support the intent of these bills, but our experience in a high
growth district like Selwyn means we've already experienced the gap that opens
up between policy intent and what is actually
deliverable on the ground. Our core point is that this
reform programme
runs the risk of becoming another RMA, and some of us are old enough to
remember when that came in.
And that goal posts take time to materialize,
and then they start to shift year on year, and it's the rate payers
who end up paying the price for those shifts.
So I'll just pass over to Sophie, who will be making a few comments
before you get me again.
Yeah. Kia ora koutou. So our first query is
around
the implementation of these new bills, particularly the timeline and the
cost. So for instance, our district plan review, which only completed,
was notified a couple of years ago. We're still resolving appeals now.
That started in 2015.
And we're worried that
knowing the pace of this, even when the zoning and everything else will be
largely determined further up the funnel, the
speed and potentially poor sequencing of all of the direction
could easily result in councils having to stop and start and create poor
outcomes. Realistically, the other option of slowing down means that
concurrent reforms that are going on elsewhere in the government
could then also be impacted. So not quite sure what the answer is.
That's for you guys to work out. But the unclear costs is also
huge. Just looking the other day at what the West Coast combined plan
so far is closer to $9 million, I believe.
But in the meantime, we're starting our long term plan planning soon, which is
the budgets.
Rating caps are imminent, and somehow we've got to plan for the costs of
implementing all of these reforms.
Ideally, for us, the sequencing would be national direction, then environmental
limits, then spatial planning, and a period of
time that is comparable to the complexity of this job across each
region.Our other comment around that is community
engagement, just because the funnel is going to be
determining a lot of what we have to implement down on
the ground. And the new bills will significantly limit opportunities for local
input, and engagement and collaboration with Maori is also reduced down
to participation.
The Crown can do a lot better than this.
You can prevent further loss of trust in public institutions
by enabling public local flexibility in
how we implement this.
And the gap at the moment between public opinion and legal directives,
it's like a bellwether. It's not a reason for shutting people out
of important decisions in their local areas.
Thanks, Sophie. And so I'm just going to build on those
implementation challenges. As I said, our concern is not with the
intent, but with how things like spatial plans and land use
plans will actually operate in practice.
Those spatial plans are intended to provide long-term regional direction,
including where growth should occur and how infrastructure will support it, but
the time frames for preparing those plans are really
compressed, particularly given the need to align data across our
entire region, infrastructure planning, and input from
multiple councils and agencies. And all of that
increases the risk of incomplete information or
inaccuracies.
For example, spatial plans may signal growth in locations where
infrastructure is not ready or even able to be funded.
Those signals then flow through into the land use plans.
However, land use plans are only required to implement spatial
plans, not be fully consistent with them.
And there is no clear ability to decline a private plan
change that then sits outside this framework.
So in practice, development can still occur ahead of our
infrastructure planning, and that's where you create a disconnect.
Councils are then required to respond by bringing infrastructure
forward, often through borrowing, to service development that
may not yet align with the planned sequence.
And then you have the timing uncertainty.
Land can be zoned and consented, including through fast track pathways,
but development may not occur for several years or in the
locations that best align with existing infrastructure capacity.
And then part of that is also potential
land banking issues.
So for councils, we're sitting there knowing that a development is coming, but not
when.
So we're having to make long-term infrastructure decisions ahead
of any confirmed demand,
and we're not actually seeing housing affordability improve.
That tells us that enabling supply alone may not be
sufficient.
More enabled land or long-term planning does not automatically translate
into more houses being delivered in the short term, or indeed at
lower prices, as we're seeing in Selwyn.
Developers control release to manage risk and profitability, and
rightly so. That's their business model.
But that can constrain supply, and that's the balance we're all trying to
strike. Us here in Selwyn and you in
Wellington.
So we also want to make a comment on the regulatory
relief and compensation provisions.
There's a real risk that environmental protections delivered through these
plans could create financial liabilities for councils without a
clear funding mechanism.
So we either run roughshod over the
environment,
and then we don't have to pay compensation because the private landowner will be
happy,
but the people who live here have to live with those consequences,
and those consequences are cost
consequences to ratepayers. So when you combined all
these factors, compressed time frames, weak alignment
between the spatial and land use plans, timing uncertainty,
and funding gaps, the likely outcome may not be the
more enabling system that you're aiming for.
It may end up being more cautious.
So our core point here in Selwyn is if councils are
expected to deliver this, the system needs to be buildable,
fundable, and properly aligned in practice.
Otherwise, the risk and cost will continue to sit with the
communities we represent in the form of continued
rate increases.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Just want to add a few more things about the Natural Environment Bill as well.
The limits do need to be nationally consistent and evidence-based.
Take the point of the two submitters before, though, who mentioned around
natural levels. That obviously can be taken into account.
We do not support no net loss of indigenous biodiversity in
here, in Selwyn. Heavily modified environment already.
If we lose any more, then there's going to be pretty much none.
We do not support exemptions or directives to balance environmental
against economic concerns. We're in a state where
everything is already highly modified.
And particularly in our area, where we have nearly 2,000
kilometers worth of stock water races and land drainage, which are not
defined as infrastructure, and therefore we cannot claim currently,
or have them included in our development
contributions policy. We would love to see natural infrastructure
included in both of the bills,
as something that we can then work with.
Because it has a huge impact when we have, for instance, a plan change
which allows housing in an area which then creates flooding
downstreamAnd lastly,
interactions between all of these different documents,
the policy statements and everything else.
We've seen it before here where the national policy statement for
urban development has different outcomes to
highly productive land, and it's always the land that loses.
Somewhere along the line, the precedents that have already been set through the
RMA, the common language that is understood by planners and
developers and everybody else, we need some level of consistency and an
understanding of how the hierarchy works, otherwise we are going to snarl the
whole thing up in legal arguments and nothing will speed up.
It just will not be efficacious.
So yeah, that's pretty much it. We've got about 30 seconds left, I think.
Yes.
Look, we have to cover-
But thank you very much for the time
... we'll go to Cameron Luxton first.
Thank you. I'll just go back to an earlier part of your submission.
You talked about Maori being reduced down to participation, and reading in
your written submission, you've got council
relationships with iwi
required for consenting processes.
Is that currently the case, that iwi are required
to have a say in consenting? And do you think
that
this new system
will still enable the voice of iwi to be heard at the planning stage?
And what's the justification for
iwi having a say at the consenting stage?
In our local area, so
the local iwi is Ngai Tahu, and the six
nearby runanga, there's two of them that have their takiwā cover Selwyn District.
They have an agency known as Mahonui Kurataio.
We do invite them to put some input into a number
of consents, depending on whether it's relevant to what
exists in the iwi management plan.
At the moment, that works well from
my personal point of view. What I'm worried about,
and admittedly this isn't something I have personally discussed with the council,
so this is my opinion on your question.
If the law changes and requires a different level of participation
from iwi Maori, then it will slowly degrade,
being a death by a thousand cuts. We have good relationships right now, but if you
aren't quite so compelled to have those
relationships, the relationships will change over time because the power
dynamic has changed.
Mm-hmm.
That will be a loss.
So to be clear, the function that's making
Selwyn Council is the iwi partnership agreement to have
say on consents. That was the answer to that.
Yeah.
And then changing it would be a degrading of-
There is value in hearing what iwi Maori have to say about-
Oh, so for certain consents
... consents that impact the environment, yeah.
Excellent.
The iwi management plan is a stat...
Well, I don't think it's a statutory document, but it's recognized in our district
plan and in regional policy statements.
Look, thank you very much. We're going to have to leave it there.
We appreciate your time, your submission.
Yeah, really good submission.
Yeah, it was very helpful.
So thank you. Thank you very much for that. Thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Good luck.
So now moving on to our next submission,
Save Our Springs Aotearoa New Zealand.
Yes, please.
Who are also joining us online.
Yeah, nobody wants to drive over that road if they don't have to.
That's fair enough.
Good morning, Kevin. Welcome to the select committee, and I can
see you there, John, as well. You have 10 minutes with us, so take
your submission as read, but we'll hand it over to you to talk us through it.
So, thank you.
Tena koutou, Chair. Tena koutou, members of committee.
Thank you for this opportunity to address you this morning.
My name's Kevin Moore, and I am the coordinator of Save Our Springs.
I'm joined by resource management lawyer, John Kamasaris.
The purpose of Save Our Springs is to protect the aquifers, lakes,
and rivers of New Zealand, particularly the pristine waters of Te Waihora
Spring. We have over 3,000 supporters.
30,000.
30,000
supporters.
We submitted on the bills because we are deeply
concerned about the degrading state of our water,
and because we want the health of our waterways to improve.
We are focused on water conservation orders because they protect the
values of our most outstanding water bodies.
I will now hand over to John to take you through our submission in more
detail.
Kia ora. Thank you, Kevin, and good morning, Chair and committee
members.
Save Our Springs is very pleased to see water conservation
orders retained in the Natural Environment Bill.
Since their inception,
there have been a few special interest groups
lobbying for water conservation orders to be scrapped
because of perceived duplication and because of concerns about
restrictions
on farming.
Save Our Springs strongly disagrees.
They are the only mechanism that recognizes
and protects water bodies with nationally outstanding
values.
Water conservation orders recognize, in a nationally consistent way,
the existing state of outstanding water bodies and provide
limits to ensure those values are maintained.
They do not affect existing use rights-Or
resource consents granted prior to commencement,
as long as the activity remains the same.
They do not override local planning processes.
Rather, they are community led, robust and evidence-based,
and the protection they provide is enduring.
They generally enable activities to continue
so long as the existing state of the water body is
conserved. And that is something,
I would posit, many New Zealanders would agree is worth
preserving in the new resource management system.
Now, the Water Conservation Order provisions in the Natural
Environment Bill
largely mirror those in the RMA.
And I'll first touch on some of the improvements needed, and
then address some of the amendments made in the bill, compared
to the RMA that are both unnecessary and inappropriate.
Starting first with the improvements, Save Our Springs acknowledges
that the Water Conservation Order framework in the
RMA is not perfect and
even our most outstanding and protected water bodies are
facing degradation.
This is a great opportunity for refinement.
One particular area for improvement is,
increasing the legal effect of Water Conservation Orders so that plans made under
the bills have to give effect to the orders,
and so that permits do not contravene the orders.
Another really important
way that the orders can be improved is monitoring enforcement.
Now, Save Our Springs supports the clarification that local
authorities are responsible for monitoring,
but further clarification in the bill is needed that consent authorities
are also responsible for enforcing compliance.
Turning now to a couple of the amendments that have been made in the
bills compared to the RMA,
and these are discussed in detail in the written submissions, so I'll
touch on them only briefly now. First
is,
Save Our Springs is
saying that it's inappropriate that appeals to the Environment
Court have been restricted to points of law only.
This is an important change because allowing
appeals on factual issues
is really important because it improves the rigor of the decision,
and the Environment Court is the most appropriate
place for those contentious, factual, merits-based
issues to be considered.
Several Water Conservation Orders have gone to the
Environment Court for final consideration, and that process has been
robust and effective.
The second change in the bill compared to the
RMA that's of particular importance is the deletion of spiritual
and cultural characteristics from the list of characteristics that Water
Conservation Orders can protect.
Now, this is a significant change.
There is no real reason for not including those
characteristics,
and their exclusion would leave a significant gap.
It would exclude important relational and deeply human aspects
of spirituality, such as sacredness, that may not
otherwise be protected.
The Special Tribunal considering the Rangitata order, for instance,
described the evidence from submitters about feelings and emotion they
experienced of the river. And I'll just
briefly read a passage that I think is
apt.
The tribunal said, "In addition to those who mentioned the spiritual
values directly, others spoke of similar feelings,
including the magic of the Rangitata River, the pure
pleasure of being there, and how it has held a spell over their
lives. They spoke of the peace, tranquility, the beauty and
the grandeur, and the inherent wild and scenic qualities, especially in
the upper river.
The wild turbulence of the white water in the gorge and the sheer volume of
water in this river demands respect.
The feeling of space and wideness of the sky at the mouth and the beautiful
sunrises and sunsets were described."
Now, the most recent Water Conservation Order to Waikoropupu Springs
is also an excellent example.
Save Our Springs was intimately involved in the process
to create that order and produced evidence to the Environment
Court,
including in respect of cultural and spiritual values.
Now to finish, I'll let Mr. Moran close with a short excerpt from the Court's
decision,
and then we are both happy to take questions.
Yeah. Just to let you know, you only have a couple of minutes left of time, so if
you want some questions, just to be mindful of that.
Thank you.
Yes. Thank you.
I would just like to
conclude my part in this with,
just a short quote from the water conservation hearing,
and this is part of the decision they made, and the
judge and the two commissioners,
this is quoting directly from the Water Conservation Order.
They said, "We accept the evidence of Mr. Moran and Ms.
Samson on these matters. They explained how they find the
springs to have a sacredness that is unique and spiritually
renewing and hence outstanding. In essence,
their experience was that the subject waters are
extraordinary in those terms. These are, of
course, personal experiences. Nevertheless, our
site visits enabled us to appreciate how the special
qualities of the springs include the way people
experience them as spiritually rejuvenating and
renewing."It is associated with the vibrancy
and purity of the waters and their peaceful setting.
We adjudge that the springs have
outstanding spiritual values.
So I'll hand it back to you for questions.
Thanks very much. We'll take the first question from Rachel.
Thank you, and thanks for being clear that you are happy
that WCOs are in the legislation, but not happy about the
removal of the cultural and spiritual element and the need for, and the
merits-based appeal.
Wanting to link to the fast track legislation, which doesn't account
for WCOs and is still in play with these reforms,
how do you see the link between that fast track and your concerns
over the Sams Creek and then this legislation?
Yes. So I'll start on that one. And I think,
well, first of all, it's clear that water conservation orders
need to also apply to fast track applications.
Fast track approvals should not be able to be granted where they're
contravening a water conservation order.
The orders are essentially the national park
of water bodies in New Zealand, and we
have similar restrictions in relation to mining for Schedule 4 land under the
Conservation Act. The same should apply in respect of water conservation
orders.
Kevin, did you have anything to add to that, or are we able to take another
question?
Yeah, I think we can take another question, Shauna. Yep.
Okay.
Cameron,
you didn't have a question? Okay. No.
We-
I've got a question.
Oh, Lan. Yes.
Tena koutou. Thank you so much for your submission.
My question was about the legislation generally.
We've heard there's, to put it in maybe a more positive note, a
lot of potential gaps when it comes to environmental
protection generally. And I was wondering, a
number of people have raised the potential for something
like a maintain or improve clause in the
legislation that would sort of essentially just hold the
line and ideally make things get better.
Do you think that's something that could be in place
to actually protect not only water conservation
orders, but special areas like Te
Waipoupou?
And would that have value in your
opinion?
Yes, of course it would. And just to note that
water conservation orders are about conservation, and
you would've heard a lot about,
from certain groups, about water conservation orders restricting activities and
being really
about improving things. And actually, a lot of the time, it's
just about maintaining the existing state of these outstanding water
bodies. And so, of course, there is a gap in relation to actually
improvement. And that is something that
should be addressed and provided for in the bills.
But it's also just to note that the orders themselves,
they provide for conservation of outstanding values and as I've said in the
submission, I think that's
something that a lot of Kiwis would
and do support.
Look, thank you very much. We are gonna have to leave it there.
We've gone over time, but we appreciate your time today, and your
submission. So thank you.
Thank you.
So we now move to our next submitter, Groundswell
New Zealand.
Oh, there we go. We can see you there, Bryce.
Welcome to the-- and Jamie, we can see you there.
Hello.
Welcome to the select committee today.
Look, you've got 10 minutes with us for your submission, but take your submission
as read, and we'll hand it over to you to talk us through your main
points. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you. I'll just introduce myself. I'm Bryce McKenzie.
I don't know if Laurie Patterson's here. I can't see anybody else on the screen.
He was going to be here. Him and I were the
co-founders of Groundswell, and we have Jamie McFadyen, who is our
environmental spokesman, who will be doing most of the
speaking. But perhaps, if I can just start off by saying we were
pretty disappointed that with an email base
of over 80,000 and a massive social media following, that
we missed the cut to be able to do a decent
presentation. This seems pretty short-sighted,
when we consider other groups representing agriculture had at least
three hours, and possibly longer, with having input into the bill
initially. So we're pretty disappointed in that.
But however, here we are.
So, for a coalition government who campaigned on removing
regulations, we have some suggestions for you on how to
do that.
For myself, I'm a member of the
award-winning, nationally recognized Pomahaka Water Care
group. We're a group of volunteers who have achieved
over 50% of people in our catchment being members
of our group.
Now, this is just done by encouraging people to take an
interest in their catchment.
What we've done is, basically, we started
water testing back in 2015 to understand where we needed to
put our energies.
Once we found out what our main problems were,
the next step was to, of course, work out how we could rectify those
problemsNow, we've managed to come a long
way in that time and have won a number of awards for
what we've done.
One of the other things we did which we found worked really well is
we started up a best practice response team, and they have
their own hotline. Now, that receives many calls and
is followed up by members of the Watercare group.
And we get people reporting any
breaches of best practice, and it is well used.
One question we do have, and we've discussed it a bit,
is why a catchment with good water quality
needs to have bureaucratic farm plans which give far more
stress for no real gain. So if you want to get rid of some
regulations, we have some suggestions for it, and I'll pass it over
to Jamie to follow up.
Okay, I'm just going to go through some of the key points in our
submission.
And we started off with the international research
from out of the UK, and just some
key points from that. And it was around the
dramatic rise of local-led restoration across
the world as people have lost faith in the state's
ability to provide
environmental leadership-
Oh, you're breaking up a bit there, Jamie.
We're struggling to hear you
... suitable legislation.
What we're seeing is top-down approaches across the world are increasing from that
research, the buy-in and empowerment of local...
Can you hear me all right?
Yeah, we're... Yeah, better now.
Better now?
Yes.
Yeah.
So the third point was that the buy-in and empowerment of
local people and communities in environmental restoration is
not just a nice to have, but a must to achieve success.
The second point I just wanted to make, it's useful to understand the context I
bring to the submission. So I'm a hill country sheep and beef
farmer. I was one of the first students in 1989 to finish a
three-year university course that included the RMA.
Three years of environmental services chair on Hurunui District Council
and qualified as a hearings commissioner.
I bring a perspective of working over the past 30 years with hundreds of
farmers, advising and implementing environmental projects
from the high country mountains to the sea.
I live and breathe the environment, the RMA consents, farm plans
and practical farming in a way that few others experience.
So my third point, before the RMA, farmers had government subsidies
to clear forests, drain wetlands and maximize stock numbers.
Despite this, many chose an alternative path, the catchment board
system of a trusted partnership of an advisor working with
farmers through a rolling farm environment plan that blended
conservation with development.
The legacy being extensive tree plantings, farmers setting up the
QEII Trust, and 2.8 million hectares of
native vegetation on sheep and beef farms, a quarter of our
country's total native vegetation.
Where else in the world can such an impressive claim be made?
And previous submitters have talked about the failure of farm plans.
Well, that's simply not true. The success of the catchment board farm
plan system was it empowered farmers in
environmental sustainability. So that was
a huge successful programme.
Point four, with the RMA, we relied on rules and consents to
manage development. We do not argue that regulation is definitely
needed for the likes of water takes, effluent ponds, discharges, many
other activities. But relying solely on
regulation to protect the environment has proven disastrous under the
RMA.
20 years ago, with the dairy boom in full swing, we saw a rapid loss
of the remaining Canterbury Plains' dryland forest remnants,
wetlands, and the pollution of rivers.
I approached the irrigation and dairy sectors in North Canterbury, drew up a
plan and set about to successfully implement a system
similar to the catchment board. It is no fluke that our area
of North Canterbury is now seen as environmental leaders with a
huge amount of restoration and enhancement,
particularly wetlands and waterways.
And the stuff we're doing at the moment is just, it's incredible, I mean, the
amount of work we're doing.
Point five, section six,
particularly SNA's Landscapes, and more recently SASMs,
has been a curse on our country, pitting residents against their
councils with protests from Northland to Southland over the life of the
RMA.
The regulatory relief proposal adds more administration
complexity and cost and doesn't deal with the central issue.
Section six is inherently bad law and
needs to go.
How can you achieve protection enhancement of
natural and cultural values if the planning system penalizes
those proactive environmental endeavor and turns natural and
cultural values into a liability?
Freshwater farm plans. No matter how you shape this, many
farmers will be worse off under this incredibly ill-conceived policy.
It goes against everything this current government promises of reducing red
tape, bureaucracy, government oversight and cost.
It is particularly galling given the huge amount of industry and
grassroots effort going into many different initiatives, including
farm environment plans.
Groundswell NZ and grassroots farmers support
integrated holistic farm environment plans, not ones
just focused on freshwaterAnd we support these as one of
the tools in the toolbox, but they must be industry-led
and a top-down government approach will be met with fierce resistance
and will fail.
I have been actively involved in many farm plan models over 30 years.
My two most important messages are, one, that every farmer
and farm is different, and the mix of approaches and tools
that work best for each farmer is incredibly varied.
One tool, one size fits all doesn't work.
Point two, the key outcome with farm plans is that it
must empower farmers and environmental
sustainability, that they live and breathe in everything
they do.
Question,
83% of farmers in a beef and lamb survey
oppose mandatory government prescribed freshwater farm plans.
How do you expect this policy to succeed with this
degree of opposition?
Consents.
Massive issues with consents, and it's the cost.
Many of our clients, $30,000 to $80,000, taking two
to four years for irrigation consent renewals.
Previous submitter talked about the role of iwi in consents,
and it's just made it more complex and more frustrating for
farmers.
Seven, point seven: How many catchment type groups, biodiversity
trust, weed and pest initiatives are across New Zealand?
How many dairy and irrigating farmers are already under a farm environment plan
system?
Section 32 of the RMA is an excellent planning mechanism,
not given genuine attention by councils or central government.
How can you develop workable environment legislation if you don't
know the current state?
Hence, Groundswell NZ's submission that a stocktake of current state
is done before progressing the legislation any further.
This is also to assess what the threats are to our environment, particularly
in weeds and pests.
Point eight, last point. Groundswell NZ is
incorrectly seen as a protest movement against regulation.
Bryce McKenzie's founding principle remains someone at the
forefront of environmental sustainability, Pomahaka
Water Care Group, frustrated with the failure of government to not only
design workable legislation, but that undermines the
environmental work of landowners and communities. Thank you.
Look, thank you very much, Jamie, and a lovely background that you have
there on the farm. Look, we don't have time for many questions, but we'll go to
Grant McCallum for a question.
Gidday, team. Thanks for your submission. Really appreciate it.
I'm just curious, you talk about section six and the whole SNA
concept. How as farming community, how do you
then reassure the general public of New Zealand that
actually any areas of real natural significance, like particular wetlands, will be
taken care of if there's no regulatory oversight?
How
could we actually achieve that?
So the first thing is that the rules and the SNA mapping don't protect the
SNAs. So we did a presentation to our local council of
a whole heap of SNAs around here, like this one behind me.
Yeah.
And we demonstrated that the rules and mapping were not protecting these
SNAs because the protection of SNAs relies on active management, and
that active management has to come from farmers.
So what they've done in our district is a template for the rest of the
country. They got rid of SNAs. There's no mapped SNAs.
We've got a biodiversity trust. I'm a founding trustee.
We've got the Hurunui District Land Care Group.
We've got catchment groups, a whole lot of new catchment groups.
We've got a whole lot of biodiversity initiatives being rolled out by the
community. The council have stepped back and let us get on with it.
They support us and they've let us get on with it.
You've got to remove natural and
cultural values from the legislation, otherwise you'll keep having them as a
liability. They've got to be an asset.
Thank you.
Just Grant, if I could say something about it, particularly
addressing wetlands. The wetlands in our catchment have grown,
I would hate to think by numerically how many, because
when we did trials, we found the only way to remove
phosphorus from waterways was to actually be able to stop the
water flow and let it drop out. So our wetlands in the
Pomahaka catchment, I would say have probably increased tenfold.
So it's just happening naturally if you have an interest in the purity of your
water.
Thank you.
Look.
Thank you, and just time for one last quick question. Rachel Brooking.
Just tiny question on the photos you've got there and the willows.
And I understand the problems with crack willows, but you're talking
about the purple willows as well. On this photo, are
these baby willows or are the willows further out?
I didn't mention this, but this is probably a critical point.
I was in a meeting with regional council and a whole lot of ecologists and others,
and my gosh, amongst us, we think this willow
weed is the biggest threat we've ever seen in terms of weeds of pest in New
Zealand. It's taking over whole braid plains of riverbeds.
I had regional council staff, senior staff out there a couple of weeks ago.
Couldn't believe it. Whole braid plains.
So the crack river grows on the sides of the willows, of the rivers.
It doesn't grow through the middles of the braid plains that much.
Whereas this willow, it's a purple willow, it's a shrub type willow.
It's taken over whole braid plains of riverbeds.
It's absolutely frightening.
It's this low stuff on the... It's the-
Yeah. It's all the low stuff in the middle of the photo.
So on the left, far left and the far right, you can probably just see some crack
willows.
Yeah.
But all through the middle of that photo, that used to be clear braid plain where
river nesting birds used to nest. So that's why we
say with the whole legislation, the legislation's almost,
we're so far behind what we're dealing with at the coal face here.
We're dealing with massive environmental disasters here.
Deer and pigs like on this farm here.
It's just out of control, and we've got
legislation that's not getting us in front of
all this environmental damage that we're seeing.
Question. Okay. Thank you very much, Jamie, Bryce, and Laurie.
We appreciate your time today.
Thank you.
So that brings us, members, to the end of our public
session,
and so we will now move into private session.